[1]

THE
METHOD
TO
SCIENCE

BOOK I.

LESSON I.

Of Notions, or the very First Ground on
which all Science is built.

1. We experience, that Impressions are
made upon our Sense, and that
those Impressions are Different, ac-
cording to the different Nature
of the Objects that imprint them
2. We experience also, that those Impressions
do not stay in the Outward Senses, but reach the
Soul, and affect it.
B 3. Eve-

2 The Method to Science.

3. Every thing being received according to
the nature of the Subject that receives it, and the
nature of the Soul being a Capacity of Knowledge;
hence, those Impressions must so affect the Soul, as
to cause some kind of Knowledge in her, how
rude and Imperfect soever it may yet be.
4. The Impressions from Objects that affect the
Senses, and by them the Soul, do carry the very
Nature of those Objects along with them, and im-
print them in the Soul: which Prints, or, as it
were, Stamps, as received in the Understanding, we
call Notions.
5. Wherefore Notions are the First and Rudest
Draughts of Knowledge; being most Simple, and
Naturally wrought in the Soul by the strokes of
occurring Objects, without any Industry or Active
Concurrence on our part.
6. That these Notions are the very Natures of
the Thing, or the Thing it self existing in us in-
tellectually, and not a bare Idea or Similitude of
it, appears hence evidently, that when we say
interiourly, or judge A Stone is hard, we do not
intend to affirm, That the Likeness or Idea of a
Stone is hard, but the very Stone it self. And
were it not so, the Proposition would be false;
(for the Similitude of a Stone in our Mind is not
Hard) whereas yet we are well assur'd that Pro-
position is True.
7. Again, we experience, that we consider,
judge, and discourse of the very Thing it self, and
of its very Nature; which (these being Inte-
riour or Immanent Acts, bred and perfected within
our Soul) we could not do, unless the Objects of
those Acts, or the very Things themselves were 
there. 8. Last-

The Method to Science. 3

8. Lastly, It cannot be deny'd, but that we have
in our Soul the full and compleat Sense of this
Proposition, and Notions of every distinct part of
it, viz. [There is in me the Idea or Likeness of a
Stone.] Therefore there is in me something sig-
nified by the word [Stone] not only distinct
from Idea and Likeness, but moreover Relatively
Opposite to it, as the thing Represented is to that
which represents it; which can be nothing but
the very Stone it self.
9. Nor need it cause any Wonder, that the same
Ens or Thing may have diverse Manners of Exist-
ing one Corporeal, the other Intellectual or Spi-
ritual, since the Thing (v. g. Peter) * abstracts *See Book
even from Existence it self; for 'tis not found in 3* Less. 7.
the Notion or Meaning of that word, that the Sect. 3,4.
Thing signified by it Exists, or not Exists; much
more then does the Notion of Thing abstract from
(that is, is Indifferent to) all Manners of Exist-
ing.
10. The words Notion, Simple Apprehension,
Conception, and Meaning, are all synonymous terms.
They are called Notions, because they are the
Parts or Elements of Knowledge; which, put and
consider'd together, make Cognition, which is
Proper and Compleat Knowledge. They are
call'd Simple Apprehensions, to distinguish them from
Judgments, which are compounded of more Noti-
ons, and belong to the second Operation of our
Understanding. Or rather, because by them we
simply or barely Apprehend, that is, lay hold of,
or take into us the thing, about which we after-
wards Judge or Discourse. They are call'd
Meanings, because they affect the Mind, which 
B 2 only

4 The Method to Science.

only can mean or intend; or else, in relation to
the Words whose Meanings they are. They are
called Conceptions, in order to the Power, which,
impregnated by the Object, conceives or (as it
were) breeds them as the Embryo's of Knowledge.
Laftly, they are said to be the Natures of the Things,
because (as was shewn) they are such essentially and
formally; in nothing differing from them, but
only that they connotate a new Manner of Exist-
*B.3. Z.7 ing, which * is Extrinsecal to the Thing, and to
S. 4,6. the Nature or Essence of it.
The word [Idea] is the least proper, because
it seems to signifie a bare Similitude; unless the
Users of it would express themselves to take it
in that sence in which we take the word [Notion]
here; or, as we use to understand it when we
say, that the Idea's of all things were in the Di-
vine Intellect before they were created; that is,
their very Essences.
11. Notions are called Simple Apprehensions, not
from the Fewness of the words that express them,
nor from their not having any Grammatical Com-
position or Syntax in them: but,from the nature or
manner of this Operation of our Understanding.
For, since (as was said) they are called Simple
Apprehensions, because by them we simply or bare-
ly apprehend or lay hold of the Nature of the
Thing intellectually; it matters not how many
or how few the words are, so we do no more
than meerly Apprehend or Take the Meaning of
the Words, or the Notions, into our Minds,
without Judging or Discoursing of them. Whence,
we may have a simple Apprehension of a long Sen-
tence, nay, of a whole Sermon or a great Book;
as

The Method to Science. 5

as long as we do not set our selves to Judge or
Discourse of the Truth or Falshood of what's said
or writ; but purely to Apprehend the Sence or
Meaning of the Speaker or Writer.
12, Notions being the Natures of the Things
in us, have neither Truth nor Falshood in them
formally, since they do neither affirm or deny
(only with Speeches are capable of Formal Verity
or Falsity) any more than does the Thing it self
as it stands in Nature, or out of the Understand-
ing.
13. All the Verity they have is their Metaphysi-
cal Verity, or their being truly what they are. And
they partake this from the Idea's in the Divine
Understanding, from which they unerringly flow,
and which are essentially Unchangeable. By
which we see how the God of Truth is the sole
Author of all the Truth that is in us, and how
he does (ordinarily) communicate it to us, viz.
by Fixing unalterably the Natures or Essences of
Things; from which, being thus Establish'd and
imprinted on our Minds by our Senses, all Science
and Truth in us have their Certainty originally.
14. All true Science being thus built on the
Immovable Stability of the Essences or Natures of
Created Beings, it follows necessarily, that all
Discourses that are not Agreeable to the Natures
of Things, and Grounded on them, are Frothy,
Incoherent, and False, and, if pursued home, must
be found to have a Contradiction for their First
Principle, in regard they make the Natures of
Things to be what they are not.

B3 15. Where-

6 The Method to Science.

15. Wherefore Notions being the Natures of the
Things in our understanding, the Method to pur-
sue True Science is, to attend and hold heedful-
ly and steadily to those Notions which the Things
without us have imprinted or stamp'd in our
Minds; and to be very careful lest Imaginations
(which are the Offsprings of Fancy, and do oft
misrepresent the Thing) do delude us, or the
Equivocation of Words draw us aside, and make
us deviate from those Genuine and Nature instill'd
Notions.

COROLARIES.

Corol. I. Hence is seen how Unreasonable the
Scepticks are who endeavour to undermine all
Science, by pretending that all our Notions are
Uncertain. For they being caus'd by Natural
Impressions on our Senses, those Men may as well
pretend, that Water does not wet, or Fire burn,
as that the Objects work not their several Effects
upon our Senses. If they contend, that, every
Man's individual Temper being different, our
Notions must therefore differ to some Degree in
every Man, they oppose not us, who say the
same, nor will this break any square, in our
Discoursing and our Understanding one another;
for few Men (perhaps none) can reach these In-
dividual Differences, nor consequently mean them
or intend to speak of them when they discourse.
But, if they say they are not the same in all Men
(whose Senses or Imagination are not disordered
by

The Method to Science. 7

by some Accidental Disease) substantially and in
the main; then, besides what has been now al-
ledged, they are confuted by this, that Mankind
has now for some thousands of Years held Con-
versation with one another, yet it was never ob-
serv'd that they could not understand one ano-
thers Meaning in Discourse about Natural Objects;
or if any hap'd to occurr which was Ambiguous,
that they could not make their Notions known by
Explications; or if there had been some notable
variation in their Notions, (as when to Icterical
persons, all things seem yellow, or sweet things
bitter to depraved Tasts) the Mistake can easily
be made manifest and corrected by the Standard
of the Generality of Mankind, who assure them
of their Misapprehension; and of Learned Men
particularly, who find the Cause of their Mistake
to proceed from some Disease perverting Na-
ture, or some Circumstances of the unduly pro-
posed Object, or of the Medium; or from our
Inability to reach to some minute Considerations
belonging to its Composition, Figure, &c. which
hinder not our having Science of it in other 
Cases.

Corol., 11. Hence also is shewn the Vanity of
that Tenet that maintains the Pre existence of
Souls, as far as it depends on this Ground, That
Knowledges are only Excited or Awaken'd (as it
were) by the Objects working on the Senses, and
not Imprinted there by them. For, this Ground
shakes, by manifesting the Ways and Means laid
by Nature to beget those Knowledges in the Soul,
and convey then thither from the Objects. Be-
B4 sides, 

8 The Method to Science

sides, (which overthrows all their Hypothesis) the
Knowledge that I am hic & nunc thus affected,
cannot with any sence be pretended to have been
Pre existent to the Time and Place in which that
Particular Knowledge was made; since neither
ehat Time nor (perhaps) Place was then in Being.
Whence it follows, that the Soul can gain some
new Knowledges, and this by the Senses; and if
any or some, why not, with equal reason, all that
the same Senses can receive from Objects imprin-
ted in her, which (as far as it depends on this
way of instilling Knowledge) may reach in a
manner ail Nature, and by the assistance of Re-
flexion, Discourse and Art improving it, may
stretch it self much farther.

Corol. III. From this whole Discourse it ap-
pears, that whatever other Method of attaining
Science some may propose, however it may seem
witty, and one piece of their Doctrine be con-
sonant to the other, and all of them consequent
to the Principles they lay, yet it will, I say, evi-
dently appear, that the way they take can never
be that which GOD and Nature have laid to in-
graft Knowledge in us. Whence, tho' such Dis-
coursers may shew much Art, yet, in reality, and
if it be examin'd to the bottom, all their Plausi-
ble Contexture and Explication of their own
Scheme, will be found no better than the running
pretty strains of Division upon no Ground; since their
pretended Knowledges do not begin with, nor
grow up orderly from the Natures of the Things
themselves, or from our Natural Notions, which are
the Seeds of Science.
Co-

The Method to Science 9.

Corol. IV. Our Discourse here abstracts from
that Question, Whether sensible Qualities are In-
herent in the Object or in the Sentient? It is enough
for my purpose that the Objects work upon the
Senses, so as to imprint by their means several No-
tions in the Mind. Yet, I do not fee how Mr. Hobbs
proves (for he does not so much as attempt it)
that Light coming from the Object does not car-
ry away with it some Particles of it; since we
experience, that the Sun beams dry up great Ponds,
which they could not do, unless they did, when
reflected, dip their dry Wings in that moist Ele-
ment, and return with some Particles of Water
into the Air; which, when multiply'd, are conden-
sed afterwards into Clouds: And I believe it will
be granted, that the Sun-beams reflected from the
Moon bring along with them moist Vapours.
Much less is it conceivable that in Smells and
Tasts nothing at all of the Nature of those Ob-
jects should be convey'd by the Nerves to the
Brain, but only a certain kind of Notion. 'Tis
not my task to defend the Opinions of School-
men, nor those of vulgar Philosophers, which he
impugns, but to mind my own business. Tho' had I
a mind to lose a little time, it were easie to shew,
that he seems to mistake along our Perceptions
for what is perceiv'd of the Object: And I might
as easily deny, that Colour (for example) is nothing
but Light; and affirm that 'tis such a disposition
in the surface of a Body, Figur'd thus or thus
with Parts and Pores, as is apt to reflect more or
less of the Light, and then to assert, that that
Disposition of the Surface is truly and really Inhe-
rent in the Object or Body it self, -sed hac obiter.
LES-

10 The Method to Science.

LESSON II.

Of the Distinction of Natural Notions, and
of the Reducing them under Ten Common
Heads.


1. Ever individual Thing not only (as was said)
Less. 1. * imprints a Notion of it self in our Minds,
S. 1,2 but many diverse Notions, according to the Va-
rious Impressions it makes upon the same or di-
verse Senses. This is manifest by Experience;
for we find that an Orange (for example) cau-
ses in us the several Notions of Yellow, Heavy,
Round, Juicy, Hard, &c.
2. We can consider One of those Notions,
without considering the Others. For we expe-
rience, that we can abstract the Notion of Round
from the notion of Heavy, (or any of the rest)
and Consider it apart, and Discourse of it ac-
cordingly.

(3.) Note, That since the Object or Thing
in our Understanding is capable of being
consider'd diversly, hence [Notion] gets
the name of [Considerability] and diverse
Notions are said to be diverse Considera-
bilities of the Thing; which yet is no
more but the same Thing as diversly con-
sider❜d.

3. Whe-

The Method to Science 11

3. Whether or no there be any Knower of a
superiour Order, that can at one Intuitive View
comprehend the whole thing, yet 'tis certain that
our Soul, in this state, can have no Science of
any thing, otherwise than by these Abstracted
Notions. For since our Notions are the Ground * Less. 1.
of all our Knowledge or Science, and (as will be Sect. 13
seen shortly) we have no Notion of any Object, but 14, 15.
by Impressions on the Senses, and those Impressi-
ons do differently affect us, and so breed Different
or Abstracted Notions; 'tis manifest that we can
no otherwise know any thing here, but by Different,
that is, Abstracted, Partial or Inadequate Notions.
4. 'Tis necessary to Science, that it be Distinct
and Clear, and not Gross and Confused. This is
evident from the very Terms; for Science signi-
fies a Distinct and Clear Knowledge.
5. Our Soul cannot in this state wield more
Notions at once, nor consider them, or Discourse
clearly of them together; or rather, indeed, not
at all. This will appear evidently, by an easie
reflexion on our Interiour: For, we shall find, that
we can Discourse of each single abstracted No-
tion in an Orange, viz. on its Bigness, Round-
ness, Colour, Tast, &c. But if we would go
about to Consider or Discourse of its Roundness
and Tast both together, (and the same may be
said of any other two that are Disparate, or not
included one in the other) we shall find our selves
at a loss, and in Confusion, not knowing how to be-
gin, nor how to proceed.
6. We cannot in this state know, even singly,
every particular Considerability found in the
thing: For, tho' (for example) we can by our
Com-

12 The Method to Science.

Common Sight discern the Colour or Figure of a
thing, or of its Grosser parts, yet a Microscope
will discover to us innumerable Particularities
which escap'd our Common View; and had we
a Glass that magnified more, there would be
found still more and more Particularities than
did appear when we observ'd it formerly. Where-
fore, since every New Observation we can possi-
*L.1 bly make begets a New Notion in us, * and all
S. 13,14, our Knowledge is grounded on our Notions, we
15. can no more know the last Considerability, which
is in the thing, than we can know the least Part
that is to be found in Quantity, or in the Diffe-
rences of Figure, Colour, and other Respects
which each of those very least parts may have;
and therefore they are not All knowable by us in
this state.
7. Much less can we, in this state, know per-
fectly, or discourse scientifically of any Whole In-
dividual thing, or (as the Schools call it) the
Suppositum, taken in bulk. For, * since all the Consi-
derabilities that integrate it, and consequently
the Notions it begets in us, are blended confu-
sedly in the entire Notion of the Suppositum or
✝Sect. 6. Thing. Again, since these are ✝ innumerable,
and many of them Unknowable by us; it fol-
lows, that no one of them (that is, Nothing in
that whole Suppositum) can be distinctly or clearly
known, while we discourse of that which has
them all in bulk; that is, while we discourse of
them all at once; and consequently, the Notion
of the Suppositum, which contains them all, can-
not be clearly or perfectly known by us, nor dis-
coursed of scientifically.
8. Where-

The Method to Science. 13


8. Wherefore we cannot know in this state
any One entire Thing perfectly, since we can ne-
ver have any perfect Science of it, * either taking * S.7
it in bulk, ✝ or by Detail. ✝ S.6
9. Wherefore all we can do in this state, is to
glean from the Objects by our Senses so many No-
tions of them as may suffice to distinguish them
from one another; and may serve for our Com-
mon Use, Needful Speculation; or, lastly, for
our Contemplation.
10. Notwithstanding this, the Science attain-
able in this State may arrive to be in a manner
Infinit. For, since our Notions * are the very *L.1.
Natures of the Things, and the ✝ Natures of S.6,7,8.
the Things are the Seeds of all Science, and di-t ✝L.1.
verse Truths spring from them, and other Truths S.13,14.
do still follow by Connexion with the former;
and, || since no stint is assignable of the Con- || See B.3.
nexion of Truths, or of our Deduction of one L.4.S.12,
Truth from another; it follows that there is no 13,14.
Bound or Limit of our Science attainable here,
but that (if Art and Industry be used) it may
be in a manner Infinit.

11. 'Tis a most Fundamental Errour to fancy
that there are many kinds of little Things in the
Object, corresponding to all the different Notions
or Considerations which we make of it. For,
since the least Particle that is in it does ground
diverse Notions of it, and every various Conside-
ration of each Particle, either according to what
is Intrinsecal or Extrinsecal to it, does still beget
more Again, since no Particle can be so small,
but we can conceive or have distinct Notions of
Two Halves, and many other proportionate Parts
in

14 The Method to Science

in it, and the Particles that are or may be con-
ceiv'd to be in Quantitative Things are Numberless,
it follows, that, were all the Distinct Considera-
bilities in the Object distinct Things, we could
never pitch upon any of those Things (they still
including others in them) which we could say
is One or Undivided in its self; nor consequent-
ly could we know what Ens or Thing meant in
Corporeal or Quantitative Things, with which
we converse; which would Fundamentally de-
stroy and pervert all Human Speech and Dis-
course about any Thing, and make all Science im-
possible.
12. From what's said 'tis deduced, that it is
one necessary and main Part of the Method to
Science, to distinguish our Notions Clearly, and
L.1. to keep them distinct Carefully. For, * since all
S.13,14. Science is grounded on our Notions, and Science
✝S.5. must be Clear, and this cannot be ✝ if any Two
of them be confounded, or taken together at once;
it is manifest, that 'tis one necessary and main
part of the Method to Science, to distinguish our
Notions Clearly, and to keep them distinct care-
fully.
13. The best way to do this, is to rank all our
Notions under distinct common Heads. For, this
done, it will be easie to know, to which of those
Common Heads they belong; and those com-
mon Heads being easily distinguish't from one a-
nother, because they differ most vastly, or (as
the Schools phrase it) toto genere, it will follow
that the several Notions comprized under each
of those Heads, must likewise, to a fair degree,
be clearly known to be Distinct also.
14. There

The Method to Science. 15

14. There is but one onely Notion that is per-
fectly Absolute, wiz, that of Existence, and all the
rest are in some manner of other, Respective.
For, since all Notions that are, must be either
of the Thing it self, or of what relates or be-
longs to it, and the Thing it self relates to Exi-
stence, of which (since only a Thing can be) it
is a Capacity; and Existence, as being the last
Actuality conceivable in the Line of Being, re-
lates to no other or farther Notion; it follows
that only the Notion of Existence is perfectly Ab-
solute, and all the rest are some way or other Re-
spective.
15. Whence it follows, that the Notion of Exi-
stence is imprinted in the Soul before any other
in priority of Nature. For, since * all other No- * Sect.14
tions are Respective, and so consist in some (at least
confused or rude) Comparisons, as it were, of
that Notion to what it respects; to have which
is much harder than to have that which is per-
fectly Absolute, more Simple and not Comparative
at all; hence the Notion of Existence is the most
Easie, and therefore the first in priority of nature.
Again, since (as || will be shewn hereafter) the sub- || Less.3.
stance of all Operation is nothing but the Existence Sect.7.
of the Object imprinted on the Patient, and the
Soul must have a Notion of the Operation made up-
on her, that is, a Notion of the Existence of the
thing imprinting it; it follows necessarily, that
the Notion of the Existence of that thing is first in her.
16. From this last Reason it is evinced, that
the Notion of the Man's own Existence is wrought
in the Soul before the Notion of things without
him,

16 The Method to Science.

him, and this by the Man himself as his own Ob-
ject, and is not imprinted by Outward ones. For
*Less.1. * since the Soul has Notions of Objects, not by
Sec.1,3, Emission of its Virtue to them, but by their be-
ing Receiv'd in it, and Existing in it Intelle-
ctually; nor could it have a Notion of them, that
is, they could not exist in the Soul, without its
having a Notion first (in priority of Nature) of
its own or the Man's Existence, it follows, that
the Notion of the Man's Existence comes into
the Soul before the Notion of other things, and
consequently that it is imprinted by the Man him-
self, as his own Object, and is not caused by Out-
ward ones. Again, since the Existence of the
Man is Naturally in him, and consequently in
the Soul, (when he has a Notion of him) after
its manner, that is, intellectually; it follows, that
it has (as it were) Naturally a Notion of the
Man's Existence, and consequently, before it has
the Notion of any other thing.

Note 1. To explicate how this is done, and
why it must be so, Anatomists tell us,
that the Embryo lies in a manner round
in the Womb; whence some parts of it
do continually and necessarily touch some
others. Wherefore as soon as the Soul is
infus'd, and it is now from a meer Ani-
mal become a Man, and has got an Under-
standing Power capable to receive Notions
of Objects; those Touches or Impressions
of some parts of himself upon others, do
naturally affect the Sense, and by it the
Soul, and beget a blind Notion there of
the

The Method to Science. 17

the Man; and by a natural kind of Con-
sciousness or Experience, that he Operates
thus upon himself, * of his own Exi- *L.8.S.7
stence. 

Note 2d. Hence follows, against the Carte-
sians, that there is no kind of Necessity of
Innate Idea's: For, having once got, by
this means, the Notion of Existence, and
all other Notions being Respective or Com-
parative to it; and the Soul being of its
own nature a Comparative Power, since
(as will be seen hereafter) both our Acts
of Judging and of Discoursing are Compa-
rative Acts; hence the Soul becomes pro-
vided with Means to have all other Natu-
ral Notions whatever, by what it has from
the Object, and by it self. But of this
Point more towards the end of this Les-
son. Only it is to be remark'd, that it is
not here intended that the Soul has only
the Notion of Existence alone, and after-
wards others; for at the same time it has
the Notion of the Man existing, and exist-
ing thus by his operating thus. We only
discourse which of those Notions is first in
priority of Nature, that is, of its own Na-
ture most Knowable or Perceptible.

17. All other Notions of the Thing besides
Existence, being Respective, are either of some-
thing Intrinsecally belonging to it, or else of
something Extrinsecally refer'd to it by our Un-
derstanding. This is evident; for we can have 
C no 

18 The Method to Science.

no Notion of Non-Ens, or Nothing, nor conse-
quently of what belongs to it.
18. Intrinsecal Notions are but Four. For,
since Existence is the only Absolute Notion, and
can be refer'd to no other, all other Notions must
either Immediately or Mediately refer to it;
Wherefore all Intrinsecal Notions must either re-
fer the Thing it self immediately to its Exi-
stence, by considering the Ens to be of such an
Essence, as it is capable to recieve it; and then
Essence being the Immediate Power to Existence,
they are Essential Notions, and belong to that
Common Head we call Ens or Substance. Or
else they refer the Thing to some Common Man-
ner or Modification (that is, Consideration) of it,
in which all things we converse with do agree;
that is, to its Bigness or Quantity. Or else they
refer the thing to some Modification or Conside-
ration belonging to its own peculiar Nature, de-
noting how it is well or ill dispos'd in that re-
spect; which Common Head is called Quality.
Or, lastly, they refer some one Individuum, ac-
cording to something Intrinsecal to it, to another
Individuum ; which constitutes the Common Head
of Relation. And more Common Heads of In-
trinsecal Respects cannot be invented; therefore
there are only Four Common Heads of Intrinsecal
Notions.
19. Those Notions that refer not something
that is Intrinsecal to the thing, but what's Ex-
trinsecal to it, are conceiv'd to apply that Ex-
trinsecal to it either by way of Motion, or in Rest.
If by way of Motion, then, since Motion has two
terms, it may be consider'd either as coming from
the

The Method to Science. 19

the Mover, and 'tis the Notion of Action; or as
affecting the thing Moved, and then 'tis called
Passion. And, because the most Regular and
most Equable, Motion, to our apprehension is that
of the Sun, call'd Time, and therefore all Sublu-
nary Motions must bear a proportion to it, and
be measur'd by it, being perform'd while such a
proportionable part of it was Flowing; and
Mankind is forced to need and make use of such
a Measure to Adjust, Proportion, and Design all
their Motions or Actions by, and to know the de-
terminate distance of them from known and no-
torious Periods; hence there must be a Common
Head of the time When those Motions were per-
form'd, which we call Quando.
If the Extrinsecal application be conceived to
be made to the Subject or thing in Rest, then,
either that Extrinsecal thing is conceiv'd to be
barely apply'd to the whole, that is, to be Imme-
diate to it, or meerly to Contain it, which grounds
the Notion, and answers to the Question Where,
or Ubi: Or, it denotes some certain determinate
Manners how it is apply'd to the whole or to
some parts of it; and then either the whole, or
at least some Parts of the Subject or thing, must
be conceiv'd to be ply'd and accommodated to
the parts of the Extrinsecal thing, and 'tis call'd
its Site or Situation; or else the Extrinsecal
thing, or its parts, are conceiv'd to be Fit-
ted, Ply'd, or Accommodated to the Subject or
Thing, and then 'tis call'd habit.

C2 20. These

20 The Method to Science.

20. These ten Common Heads are call'd Pre-
dicaments, that is, Common Receptacles, which
Contain, and whence we may draw, all our Pre-
dicates for the Common Subject, Thing: which we
1 2
may briefly exemplifie thus: Peter, tho' but a yard
3 4 5
and half high, yet a Valiant Subject, fought and
6 7 8
was wounded yesterday, in the Field, standing upon
10
his guard, armed.
21. All these Notions, under whatever Head,
if they be Corporeal ones, are Natural and Com-
mon to all Mankind. For, since they are made by
Impressions on the Senses, which are Common to
all Mankind, it follows, that the Notions which
are the Effects of those Impressions, must be such
also, since the same Causes upon the same-natur'd
Subjects, must work the same Effects.
22. Our Soul has in it a Power of Compounding
those several Notions together, of Considering
them diverse ways, of Reflecting on its own
Thoughts and Affections; and, lastly, of joyning
a Negative to its Natural Notions if there be
occasion; such as are the Notions of Indivisible,
Immaterial, Incorruptible, Unactive, Insignifi-
cant, &c. which particularly happens when we
would strive to frame Notions of spiritual
Things. All which is manifest by plain Experi-
ence, if we reflect never fo little on what passes
in our own Interiour.
23. No Notions can be imagin'd that do not
arise from one of these Heads: For Corporeal
Notions are imprinted directly; Spiritual Notions
by Reflexion on our Mind, and on its Operations 
or

The Method to Science. 21

or Affections; or else by joyning a Negative to
our Positive natural Notions. And Mix'd or
Compound Notions are framed by joyning our for-
mer simple Notions. Wherefore, since there can
be nothing imagin'd which is not either Corpo-
real, Spiritual, or Mix'd, or Compounded of
Former Notions, 'tis manifest, that all the No-
tions we have or can have, do arise from one of
those Heads.
24. Wherefore 'tis hence farther shewn, that
there is no necessity at all of making some Noti-
ons to be Innate; and consequently that Con-
ceit of the Cartesians is Groundless, who affirm,
That by a Motion made on the Senses, the Soul, by
an unknown Vertue peculiar to its self, Excites
or awakens such and such an Innate Idea, which
till then lay dormant in it, because they find
that that Notion is nothing like to the Idea it ex-
cites: For, first, how do they prove that only
Motion is communicated to the Brain from the
Object, or, that that Motion does not carry along
with it different-natur'd Particles or Effluviums
of these several Bodies, which are (as it were)
little Models of their Nature? It is certain this
passes thus in the grosser Senses, and no more is
requisite to do it in the subtiler, but that the Par-
ticles emitted be more subtil; which cannot shock
the Fancy or Reason of a Natural Philosopher, who
knows well into what almost-infinite smallness Bo-
dy is Divisible: And, of all Men in the World,
the Cartesians should not be startled at it: whose
Principles do allow lesser Particles than those
Effluviums, and to pass thro' far lesser Pores than
those within the Nerves, or even than such as are
C3 in

22 The Method to Science

in the substance of the Nerves themselves. Now,
this being granted, the whole contexture of this
Doctrine of ours has a clear Coherence. For,
such Particles bearing the nature of the thing
along with them, are apt, when they are car-
ried to the Seat of Knowledge, to breed in the
Mind, or convey into it the Nature, (or an In-
tellectual Notion) of the Thing it self. To do
which, there can need no more, than that every
thing (according to the Maxim) be receiv'd ac-
cording to the Nature or Manner of the Receiver;
viz that those Effluviums, by affecting the Body
Corporeally, do affect the Soul Intellectually.
Secondly, How is it conceivable, or any way
Explicable, that a Motion, which they confess
is utterly Unlike the Idea in the Mind, should
be the Proper Exciter of such an Idea? Indeed,
were those Motions of the Nature of our Signs,
that are voluntarily agreed on and fore known
to the Users of them, they might have a Power
to make such a peculiar Excitation of those
Ideas, as our Words do now; or as any odd
and disagreeing Things are made use of by us
when we practise the Art of Memory. But here
things are quite otherwise; for we have no Fore-
knowledge either by Agreement, nor by our volun-
tary Designation, that such Motions shall excite
such Idea's or Notions; nor, as is confess'd, are
they Naturally alike; wherefore it is altogether
inexplicable how they should ever come to ex-
cite such particular Idea's. Add, That this hid-
den Virtue in the Soul, to make such a particular
Idea start up as soon as that Motion is made in
the Nerve, is both said gratis, and is as Obscure
as

The Method to Science. 23

as an Occult Quality; and so far from Explica-
ble, that even themselves (as far as I can learn)
have not so much as attempted to explain it: but
it seems to be in part taken up gratis, to make
good their Doctrine of innate Idea's, as the Te-
net of such Idea's is to prove the Soul is a distinct
Thing from the Body.
Lastly, Their Argument drawn from Experi-
ence, that the Idea in the Mind is quite different 
from that Impression in the Senses or any Bodily
Faculty, is shewn to be Inconclusive, by alledging,
(as was said lately) that the Nature of the Object
found in those emitted Particles, and the Nature
of it found in the Soul Intellectually (or as stand-
ing under Notion) are the self-same, and not so
Unlike as they imagin. Add, That their Argu-
ment faulters in this too, that the makers of it
did not duly reflect, when they advanced it, on
that foresaid Axiom, Qui quid recipitur, recipitur
ad modum recipientis: For, had they done this,
they could not have wonder'd that an Affection of
the Body (which is imprinted directly) and an
Affection of the Soul which is spiritual (and
known only by Reflexion) should have a Diffe-
rent Appearance: The two Manners of Existing,
with which the same Nature is vested, differing
toto genere, that is as far as Body and Spirit (their
subjects) can distance them.
To explicate this more fully, and to shew the
difference between Corporeal and Spiritual Idea's,
I offer to their thoughts this Reflexion concerning
the distinct nature of a Phantasm, which is a Corpo-
real Resemblance, and the nature of the thing in
the Mind (that is its Notion) express'd by a D
C4 finition,

24 The Method to Science.

finition, which is Intellectual and Spiritual. The
Phantasm or Corporeal Resemblance of a Man
is a kind of Picture of a thing with two Legs,
two Arms, such a Face, with a Head placed up-
rightly, that grows, moves it self, &c. Let us
regard next the Definition of a Man, or rather
(which is, abating the Expression, the same) the
Notion of him; which is, that he is a Rational
Creature, and we shall easily discern of how dif-
ferent a shape it is from the other; how it ab-
stracts from many Corporeal Qualities, Figures of
the Parts, and other Considerations, which were
Essential Ingredients to the Picture or Phantasm,
and not at all Essential to It, nor found in the
Definition, and how some Considerations too are
added in the Definition, or imply'd in it (as to
Apprehend, Judge, Discourse, &c.) which no more
belong to the Phantasm, than it did to Zeuxis's
Grapes, to have the Definition of the Fruit of
such a Vegetable predicated of them. In a word,
one of them is a kind of Portraicture, outwardly
resembling; the other speaks the most Intrinsecal
Essence of the thing Defin'd. The one signifies
Bodily Parts belonging to such an Animal, and
therefore is Corporeal: the other does not signifie,
but is the Nature signified, and this too by Words
which denote to us the Mind or Meaning (that
is, the Notion) of the speaker; which is therefore
Spiritual, at least in part. Whence the Com-
pleat Essence of Man could not be understood,
nor a Definition of it fram'd, without making
use of some of these Notions or Idea's, which are
made by our Understanding, reflecting upon its own
Spiritual Operations.

LES
